[READY FOR REVIEW] Electronic Lab Notebooks Chapter (#3466)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/rdm/rdm-elns.md

They can be a digital analogue to the paper notebook most researchers keep.
ELNs can offer several advantages over the traditional paper notebook in documenting research during the active phase of a project, including; searchability within and across notebooks, secure storage with multiple redundancies, remote access to notebooks, and the ability to easily share notebooks among team members and collaborators.
ELNs make the practice of {ref}`open notebooks <rr-open-notebooks>` [{term}`def<Open Notebooks>`] practical in a way that it is not for paper lab books.
However, it is important when choosing an ELN solution to avoid giving up the advantages offered by a paper lab notebook.

(rr-rdm-elns-procon)=
## ELNs Pros & Cons

Electronic lab notebooks may provide, among other things, the following **functionalities**:

* A text editor with similar functions as a paper notebook
* A search function
* Secure storage and back up (with distinct failture modes from paper notebooks)
* Tools for working with tabular data (calculations and formatting of tables and graphs)
* Templates for documenting standard procedures

> * Laboratory inventories for managing and documenting samples, reagents and apparatus (They may have built in or integrate with independent laboratory inventory management systems (LIMS))

Author: Addressed in [77a934b](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/77a934b71a56b1292ed5af62a6532a957cc5515f)

ELNs also have their **limitations**: 

* **Costs**: Most ELN solutions can only be used through paid plans, or the free plans have reduced functionalities in the number of users, storage space or file sizes.
Your lab may also not have access to tablets or pens that would make the use of ELNs easier.
Check if your institution is offering a solution that you can use without additional costs.
* **File format**: Always check if files can be exported in your preferred file formats to avoid format lock-in.
Some ELNs also have API's that allow integration with other software and workflows. 
* **Vendor-lock-in**: Once you're using a certain solution you may become dependent on it.
Always have an exit strategy in case the solution is no longer offered or if you're moving institutions and you no longer have access.
* **Sustainability**: Choose a solution that has a larger chance of being around for a long time.
* **Drawing**: Not all solutions have the tools or capabilities to include drawings or integration with drawing software.
* **Security**: Before using an ELN solution you should check any backup plans and data security measures, especially if you're working with sensitive data.

> * **Laboratory situation**: Your lab may not have an internet collection or electronic tools could affect samples, reagents or magnets in the lab. 

Reviewer: Typo here: "collection" should be "connection"

If your provider of paper lab books goes out of business it has almost no bearing on your ability to continue doing your work.
One paper notebook is much like another, finding a new provider is pretty easy.
Changing providers does not impact on your ability to access your past notebooks or to continue operating with the same workflow in future ones.
This is not necessarily true of ELNs.

Few active measures are needed to maintain the data in your paper notebooks, they are vulnerable as they exist in only one copy but as long as they are kept in a cool, dry and dark spot for example a fireproof safe they will likely last decades.
Electronic data requires much more active upkeep
Electronic data can *if manged properly* be more resilient to physical threats such as fire and flooding as it can frequently be backed up in multiple locations.
A hard drive or even a solid state drive however cannot be left in a draw for a decade or more and have a high likelihood of working without some amount of bitrot or compatability issue when plugged back in.

> Lab notebooks perform an archival function and proprietary formats are antithetical to this as they assume the institution which can act as a gatekeeper to the use of the proprietary format will outlive the need to archive the material.

Reviewer 2: I like @EstherPlomp's suggestion here. The intended meaning of the previous version is unclear to me.

When choosing an archival format one seeks to maximize the likelihood that one can recover the relevant information from that format.
Using a proprietary solution for archival purposes is talking a needless risk with the future of your data.
Your data's fate can become tied to that of the company, or project, that develops and operates the software that you use to store your lab notes.

When looking for any critical piece of software for long term use the first questions to ask are:
- Is there an Libre / open-source solution to this problem?
- If it is a web app and/or has a server: Could I host my own fully featured instance, should I need to?
- Is there a large/active community using the project, does it have institutional backing of some kind? 
  This might take the form of a company which sells service contracts, or offers paid hosting ideally with feature parity with a self-hosted option. 
  Or perhaps a foundation or other non-profit/academic organisation with robust funding.
- What are the data export options and formats?

> Open solutions provide you with the assurance that if you do the appropriate preparatory work you should be able to access all of your data in it's native form by running the ELN application in a virutual machine or similar reproducible computational environment in the future should you need to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open solutions are more likely to provide access to data in it's native form.
```
It is not entirely clear to me what the second part of the sentence is conveying - maybe a rewrite?

Even if the tools are no longer maintained and in a state that can be used in production.
They can still be used to read the data and interact with it in (mostly) the same way.
The data will also likely be stored in an open format from which it can relatively easily be extracted and ported to a new format.

> This may still be a lot of work but it is much more attainable than reverse engeering a proprietary format for which there is no documentation or worse still dealing with encrypted files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This may still be a lot of work but it is much more attainable than reverse engineering a proprietary format for which there is no documentation or worse - dealing with encrypted files.
```

> Most proprietary or open tools will permit you to export your data in one format or another, however the quality of this export is critical to scrutinise.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most proprietary or open tools will permit you to export your data in one format or another.
The quality of this export is critical to scrutinise.
```

The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it's the only option you may loose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 

> Migration may cost you much of your data's structure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Proprietary solutions are incentivised to attempt to lock-in their customers so that the cost of switching to a competitor is high so be especially wary of poor export options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Proprietary solutions are incentivised to attempt to lock-in their customers so that the cost of switching to a competitor is high - so be especially wary of poor export options.
```

Note that this tends to change over time. 

> New providers are focused on user aquisition so data portability tends to be good at first but decline if a firm has to shift from a growth phase to a steady state that is sustainably profitable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
New providers are focused on user acquisition so data portability tends to be good at first but may decline if a firm adjusts their strategy.
```

Mendeley for example began [encrypting their local database](https://www.zotero.org/support/kb/mendeley_import#mendeley_database_encryption) making it impossible to migrate your local library to different reference managers without going through their online library feature.
This occured after they had reached a high degree of market penetration and been aquired by Elsevier.

> Many open tools on the other hand have very robust exort and import options, as they are not subject to this incentives trap, though this is far from garunteed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many open tools on the other hand have very robust export and import options, as they are not subject to this incentives trap, though this is far from guaranteed.
```

This might include a complete database export that would let you seemlessly migrate to a different deployment of the tool. 
Or an archive of files organised by a for example a JSON file representation of your notes and files that retain most or all of the metadata and organisational information of your ELN.
There remains the challenge when migrating of finding a tool that can import what your old tool exported, and retain most of all of its structure.
This is where the development of standards for ELN formats could very valuable in the long run.

> This recent review {cite:ps}`higgins2022elns` provides a good overview of considerations when adopting an ELN solution. 

Reviewer 3: I feel it is better to start this section as a consideration of whether hosting a solution by a third party is an option, rather than starting with this resource. Instead I think it is better to put all the 'what ELN solution to pick' in one bullet point paragraph below.

It does occasionally appear to conflate open-source solutions with self-hosted ones which need not necessarily be the case.
Some companies will let you host proprietary apps on premises and conversely you can pay for 3rd party hosting and administration of open source applications.
This is important as if you don't have the expertise or internal resources to administer a self-hosted instance of an open-source ELN solution you can still pay a 3rd party to do this for you. 
In This case you get the benefits of professional support and the reassurance of an open solution.
When using an open solution it is always important to consider how you can contribute to its ongoing development and maintenence, for example by donating to the project or if it makes sense given the makeup of your organisation and that of the project contributing developer time.
You should still take regular local backups of exports from your hosting provider from which you could restore your ELN system with different hosting.
This means that you retain the option to change providers as the hosting and support are no longer vertically integrated parts of the software as a service (SaaS) experience for you.

> There are many solutions to choose from: [How to pick an electronic laboratory notebook](https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-05895-3) by {cite:ps}`Kwok2018eln` or [2019 Review of the Best Electronic Laboratory Notebooks](https://app.scientist.com/blog/2019/04/05/2019-review-of-the-best-electronic-laboratory-notebooks) may help you to find your solution!

Reviewer 3: Maybe a bullet point overview of resources that provide an overview or considerations when choosing an ELN?

This [guide on choosing an ELN from Simon Bungers of Labfolder](https://labfolder.com/electronic-lab-notebook-eln-research-guide/) is also worth a read.
The Harvard Longwood Medical Area Research Data Management Working Group Constructed an [Electronic Lab Notebook Comparison Matrix](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4723753) in 2021, for convenience [a nicely formatted google sheet version](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ar8fgwagOh30E31EAPL-Gorwn_g6XNf81g3VDQnQ_I8/edit#gid=0), is also available.

Note that ELNs with APIs have the potential for integration with instruments that would permit direct deposition of data from connected instruments into ELNs or other connected research data management infrastructure.
These sorts of integrations are especially useful in workflows at core facilities such as bioimaging facilities who can do things like automate a substancial part of the image metadata deposition into image data management tools such as [OMERO](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/omero/).

> ELNs offer many advantages over paper notebooks but they come with a considerable amount of additional complexity and a number of additional risks that it is important to have a plan to mitigate when proceeding with their adoption.

Reviewer 3: I would delete this paragraph or move it to the section below since it is not really about choosing a certain ELN solution.

The ELN space is still quite young and rapildy changing.
ELNs represent a key component of digital infrastructure for the future of research.
As such it is important to think about how the academic commuity collectively wants this infrastructure to be owned and governed in the long run at this stage in the adoption of ELNs.
An interesting model to consider emulating here is [moodle](https://moodle.com/) an open source electronic learning environment popular with universities.
It offers commercial support and hosting and has a network of developers across the education sector who contribute to the core project as well as creating custom integrations and extensions to meet their particular needs.
This structure allows institutions to pool resources to fund the development of features that they all need and keeps this infrastructural code in common ownership, avoiding the worst lock-in issues arising from the use of proprietary solutions.

(rr-rdm-open-elns)=
## Select Open Infrastructure ELN Options

> They are each quite different but have many of the same core features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Examples of Open ELN solutions are:
```

> For example rich text editing in a web browser.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The ability to upload files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Sharing and permissions based on roles/groups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

*  [eLabFTW](https://www.elabftw.net/) 

>     *   Laboratory resource scheduling feature for booking things like hoods and microscopes, automatic mol file previews for molecules and proteins & support for free-hand drawing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *  Has features such as: Laboratory resource scheduling feature for booking things like hoods and microscopes, automatic mol file previews for molecules and proteins, and support for free-hand drawing.
```

>     *   The eLabFTW [site](https://www.elabftw.net/) and [documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/) there is also a [demo](https://demo.elabftw.net/login.php) deployment that you can try out

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   The eLabFTW [site](https://www.elabftw.net/) and [documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/) has a [demo](https://demo.elabftw.net/login.php) deployment that you can try out.
```

    *   Self-hosting is *relatively* simple [according to the documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/install.html).
    There is also a [paid support tier](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) which would be recommend for any larger deployment to support the ongoing development of the project.

>     *   [Paid cloud hosting](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) is available from the developer in a geographical region suited to your needs, a more expensive tier with hosting in France compliant with additional security and privacy certifications is available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   [Paid cloud hosting](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) is available from the developer in a geographical region suited to your needs. A more expensive tier with hosting in France compliant with additional security and privacy certifications is available.
```

* [openBIS](https://openbis.ch/)

>     *   Good features for integrated metadata management for example linking to ontologies / controlled vocabularies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Includes features for integrated metadata management (for example linking to ontologies / controlled vocabularies).
```

>     This is based in a flexible object system for making similar entries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>     *   openBIS has an API and can integrate with jupyterhub for electronic lab notebooks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   openBIS has an API and can integrate with Jupyterhub for Electronic Lab Notebooks.
```

>     *   Very feature rich LIMS system with optional integration of stores management with protocols and experiments including keeping track of bar-coded stocks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Has an inventory system with optional integration of stores management, as well as integration with protocols and experiments (including keeping track of bar-coded stocks).
```

    *   You can get a feel for it in the [demo](https://openbis-eln-lims.ethz.ch/openbis/webapp/eln-lims/) deployment.
    *   openBIS is a bit more complex to administer [based on its documentation](https://openbis.ch/index.php/docs/admin-documentation/).

>     It's a slightly older and more complex project than the others on this list, meaning it is very featureful and well tested against the needs of the groups at ETH Zurich.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>     *   Developed at ETH Zurich openBIS can be hosted for you under the openRDM service operated by ETH Zurich scientific IT services.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   As openBIS is developed at ETH Zurich it can be hosted for you under the openRDM service operated by ETH Zurich scientific IT services.
```

>     No fixed pricing is available cost would be dependent on your specific needs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    No fixed pricing is available - cost would be dependent on your specific needs.
    
```

* [OSF](https://osf.io/)
    *   OSF is oriented towards sharing and collaborating on your work, including the ability to generate DOIs and host pre-prints directly on the main instance.
    *   It is free to use OSF at the main instance at [osf.io](https://osf.io/) so you can try it out there directly.
    For larger data you must provide your own additional [storage addons, available from a number fo cloud storage providers](https://help.osf.io/article/395-storage-add-ons).

>     *   Whilst OSF can be hosted yourself this is presented by the project as for the purposes of development, and is not directly available as a paid service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   OSF can be self-hosted but not as a paid service.
```

Incomplete or inflexible ELN solutions which increase friction in workflows can cause issues.
People will avoid using an ill-fitting tools that they perceive them to be getting in their way, especially scientists.
They are creative, stubborn, resourceful, and impatiently focused on anwsering their research questions with watever tools are available to them. 
They are a very demanding userbase, they are pedantically attentive to detail and have a lot of diverse and rapidly changing niche use cases which need to work just right.
They also don't like being told what to do.
Finding software the flexibility, capability, and scope to keep up is not easy and if it doesn't they won't use it, at least not as you indented.

-   Shadow IT/notebooks
    -   People using their own unsactioned solutions which may be a compliance issue and introduce risks that you have not accounted for
-   Infrequent updates
    -   People dump a copy of their work into the ELN as only often as necesary for compliance.
-   Consistency issues
    -   If there are paper and potentially multiple electronic copies of some information what happens when it does not agree? - what's the source of truth?

> -   Partial adoptions can lead to information which was previous predictably structured in lab notebooks being spread across multiple IT systems and physical copies

Author: addressed in [379d592](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/379d59258b102d694f3abdae53a3964993ad349a)

-   Practical use and interface issues
    -   Laptops or tablets can intrduce interface barriers 
        -   Something as simple as the use of touchscreens and trackpads with gloves

>         -   Free-hand drawing or use of notation not easily represented in simple text such as mathematical and chemical notation

Author: addressed in [cd2c294](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/cd2c29402bd13b20ceaaf6d1023a2b72614fd9df)

>         -   Performant native applications for devices are not always available, notebooks only accessible through web apps can have performance issues that make their interfaces frustrating to use

Author: addressed in [a630127](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/a630127c382766890264eb205403e3f84abbbf97)

        -   In a physical book people use a lot they remember spacially where things are they pick it up and open it immediately to roughly the right page

-   lack of sufficiently available training on more complex aspects of the ELN solution leading to poor, mis-use, or under-use of ELN features

>     -   Extra expense, maintenence & procurement issues with hardware suitable for use in your research environment

Author: addressed in [21b037c](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/21b037cce5905da84386ad5e31826c758a128e95)

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-compare-to-paper)=
### Always compare to paper notebooks

When picking an ELN remember to always compare the ELN to a paper notebook not just to other ELNs, it's likely paper that you are replacing so it is the benchmark against which to compare.
Consider the differences between a paper copy of a lab notebook and an electronic copy.

> Consider also which are the properties of a paper copy that it is important that you are able to retain when adopting an electronic alternative.

Reviewer 2: @EstherPlomp I think your version is missing a word somewhere

> Consider also which are the properties of a paper copy that it is important that you are able to retain when adopting an electronic alternative.

Author: addressed in [d9c1d16](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/d9c1d167af40ed9ee0b5b826b904c5e5919f4281)

-   You do not need any specialist tools in order to access its contents.
-   There is no reason why you might have to pay a 3rd party a fee in order to continue using it.
-   You do not have to agree to a 'terms of service' or 'end-user license agreement' with a third party, the terms of which may be subject to unilateral alteration by that third party, in order to use and retain access to your lab book.

If your provider of paper lab books goes out of business it has almost no bearing on your ability to continue doing your work.
One paper notebook is much like another, finding a new provider is pretty easy.
Changing providers does not impact on your ability to access your past notebooks or to continue operating with the same workflow in future ones.
This is not necessarily true of ELNs.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-archival)=
### Archival function of notebooks

Few active measures are needed to maintain the data in your paper notebooks, they are vulnerable as they exist in only one copy. 
Nevertheless, as long as they are kept in a cool, dry and dark spot for example a fireproof safe they will likely last decades.
Electronic data requires much more active upkeep.

> Electronic data can *if manged properly* be more resilient to physical threats such as fire and flooding as it can frequently be backed up in multiple locations.

Author: Addressed in [aabc7fc](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/aabc7fc52ce5407af38fdc739cf16b9418968658)

A hard drive or even a solid state drive however cannot be left in a draw for a decade or more and have a high likelihood of working without some amount of bitrot or compatability issue when plugged back in.

> Lab notebooks perform an archival function and proprietary formats are antithetical to this as they assume the institution which can act as a gatekeeper to the use of the proprietary format will outlive the need to archive the material.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Lab notebooks perform an archival function.
Proprietary formats are antithetical to this as this assumes that the proprietary format will remain functional for the archival period. 
```
Or something else to clarify this sentence

Author: clarified this here [c567a05](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/c567a051c56e793020f50c6e73f8e7a450633286), &
[c7b38f0](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/c7b38f07b4f03e7c310da34e60c3b2f6ac167647) hopefully not too long now

When choosing an archival format one seeks to maximize the likelihood that one can recover the relevant information from that format.
Using a proprietary solution for archival purposes is talking a needless risk with the future of your data.
Your data's fate can become tied to that of the company, or project, that develops and operates the software that you use to store your lab notes.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-lockin)=
### Lock-in

Most proprietary or open tools will permit you to export your data in one format or another.
The quality of this export is critical to scrutinise.

> The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it's the only option you may loose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it is the only option you may loose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 
```

> The ability to export your data and retain it's structure is very important to evaluate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ability to export your data and retain the original structure is very important to evaluate.
```

Author: Addressed in [e1318f5](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/e1318f5c6726d59c408b51fd05bf95b114e846b0)

Proprietary solutions are incentivised to attempt to lock-in their customers so that the cost of switching to a competitor is high - so be especially wary of poor export options.
Note that this tends to change over time. 

> New providers are focused on user aquisition so data portability tends to be good at first but decline after a certain point in time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
New providers are focused on user acquisition so data portability tends to be good at first but may decline after a certain point in time.
```

> Firms tends to follow a pattern of shifting from a user aquisiton phase with favourable terms, to a user retention phase with less favourable ones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Firms tends to follow a pattern of shifting from a user acquisition phase with favourable terms, to a user retention phase with less favourable ones.
```

> Mendeley for example began [encrypting their local database](https://www.zotero.org/support/kb/mendeley_import#mendeley_database_encryption) making it impossible to migrate your local library to different reference managers without going through their online library feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mendeley for example began [encrypting their local database](https://www.zotero.org/support/kb/mendeley_import#mendeley_database_encryption). 
This made it impossible to migrate your local library to different reference managers without going through the Mendeley online library feature.
```

> This occured after they had reached a high degree of market penetration and been aquired by Elsevier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This occurred after they had reached a high degree of market penetration and had been acquired by Elsevier.
```

When looking for any critical piece of software for long term use the first questions to ask are:
- Is there an Libre / open-source solution to this problem?
- If it is a web app and/or has a server: Could I host my own fully featured instance, should I need to?
- Is there a large/active community using the project, does it have institutional backing of some kind? 
  This might take the form of a company which sells service contracts, or offers paid hosting ideally with feature parity with a self-hosted option. 
  Or perhaps a foundation or other non-profit/academic organisation with robust funding.
- What are the data export options and formats?

Open solutions provide you with the assurance that if you do the appropriate preparatory work you should be able to access all of your data in it's native form.
For example keeping copies of the ELN software that can be run offline in a VM or similar computational environment in the future.
This is typically much easier for open applications and can be impossible for proprietary ones.

> Even if the tools are no longer maintained and in a state that can be used in production they can still be used to read the data and interact with it in (mostly) the same way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even if the tools are no longer maintained they can still be used to read the data and interact with it in (mostly) the same way.
```

The data will also likely be stored in an open format from which it can relatively easily be extracted and ported to a new format.

> This may still be a lot of work but it is much more attainable than reverse engineering a proprietary format for which there is no documentation or worse - dealing with encrypted files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This may still be a lot of work but it is much more attainable than reverse engineering a proprietary format for which there is no documentation, or worse - dealing with encrypted files.
```

You can pay for third party hosting and administration of open source applications.
This is a solution when you don't have the expertise or internal resources to administer a self-hosted instance of an open-source ELN solution. 

> In this case you get the best of both worlds, the benefits of professional support and the reassurance of an open solution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case you get the best of both worlds: the benefits of professional support and the reassurance of an open solution.
```

You should still take regular local backups of exports from your hosting provider from which you could restore your ELN system with different hosting.
This means that you retain the option to change providers.

> Conventionl software as a service (SaaS) platforms are highly verically integrated, the software development, hosting, and administration are package deal that you must take or leave as is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Conventional Software as a Service (SaaS) platforms are highly vertically integrated: the software development, hosting, and administration are package deal that you must take or leave as is.
```

> Using open tools breaks this up affording you the flexibility to change any of these if the need arises and you have the resources to do so, it puts you in a better bargining position.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using open tools breaks this up, affording you the flexibility to change any of these if the need arises.
```
Or a different edit to make this sentence a bit more readable

Author: Addressed in: [bfbcaec](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/bfbcaec15b27994c94556acb918eaa143a4dcf28)

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-automation)=
### Automation and integration

ELNs with APIs have the potential for integration with instruments that would permit direct deposition of data from connected instruments into ELNs or other connected research data management infrastructure.

> These sorts of integrations are especially useful in workflows at core facilities such as bioimaging facilities who can do things like automate a substancial part of the image metadata deposition into image data management tools such as [OMERO](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/omero/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These sorts of integrations are especially useful in workflows at core facilities. 
For example, bioimaging facilities can automate a substantial part of the image metadata deposition into image data management tools such as [OMERO](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/omero/).
```

(rr-rdm-elns-standards)=
## ELN standards and Project governance

> ELNs offer many advantages over paper notebooks but they come with a considerable amount of additional complexity and a number of additional risks that it is important to have a plan to mitigate when proceeding with their adoption.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ELNs offer many advantages over paper notebooks.
Nevertheless, ELNs come with a considerable amount of additional complexity and additional risks - so it is important to have a mitigation plan.
```

The ELN space is still quite young and rapildy changing.

> ELNs represent a key component of digital infrastructure for the future of research.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: Did this in: [327fba9](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/327fba994f8b0e9f0d44d30deeaf90b7858478eb)

> As such it is important to think about how the academic commuity collectively wants this infrastructure to be owned and governed in the long run at this stage in the adoption of ELNs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As such it is important to think about how the academic community wants the ELN infrastructure to be owned and governed in the long run.
```

> An interesting model to consider emulating here is [moodle](https://moodle.com/) an open source electronic learning environment popular with universities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An interesting model to consider emulating here is [moodle](https://moodle.com/), an open source electronic learning environment popular with universities.
```

> It offers commercial support and hosting and has a network of developers across the education sector who contribute to the core project as well as creating custom integrations and extensions to meet their particular needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It offers commercial support and hosting and has a network of developers across the education sector who contribute to the core project, as well as creating custom integrations and extensions to meet their particular needs.
```

This structure allows institutions to pool resources to fund the development of features that they all need and keeps this infrastructural code in common ownership, avoiding the worst lock-in issues arising from the use of proprietary solutions.
This more open distributed model also allows individuals to work on their own custom extensions and integrations instead of being reliant on the ability and willingness of a company to implement a feature that you need.

> Many open tools have very robust export and import options, as they are not subject to the incentives trap faced by proprietary offerings, though this is far from guaranteed.

Reviewer 3: It looks like this paragraph fits in better with the lock in section above?

Author: Addressed in: [1318565](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/1318565ac1917a33d1191552f368374fef03242a)

This might include a complete database export that would let you seemlessly migrate to a different deployment of the tool. 
Or an archive of files organised by a for example a JSON file representation of your notes and files that retain most or all of the metadata and organisational information of your ELN.
There remains the challenge when migrating of finding a tool that can import what your old tool exported, and retain most of all of its structure.
Such a standard would, if properly adhered too, reduces the lock-in risk associated with using using both open and proprietary tools.

(rr-rdm-choosing-elns)=
## Resources for choosing ELNs

- [How to pick an electronic laboratory notebook](https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-05895-3) by {cite:ps}`Kwok2018eln`

> - [2019 Review of the Best Electronic Laboratory Notebooks](https://app.scientist.com/blog/2019/04/05/2019-review-of-the-best-electronic-laboratory-notebooks) may help you to find your solution!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [2019 Review of the Best Electronic Laboratory Notebooks](https://app.scientist.com/blog/2019/04/05/2019-review-of-the-best-electronic-laboratory-notebooks).
```

> - This [guide on choosing an ELN from Simon Bungers of Labfolder](https://labfolder.com/electronic-lab-notebook-eln-research-guide/) is also worth a read.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Guide on choosing an ELN from Simon Bungers of Labfolder](https://labfolder.com/electronic-lab-notebook-eln-research-guide/).
```

- The Harvard Longwood Medical Area Research Data Management Working Group Constructed an [Electronic Lab Notebook Comparison Matrix](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4723753) in 2021, for convenience [a nicely formatted google sheet version](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ar8fgwagOh30E31EAPL-Gorwn_g6XNf81g3VDQnQ_I8/edit#gid=0), is also available.
- This recent review {cite:ps}`higgins2022elns` provides a good overview of considerations when adopting an ELN solution. 
  It covers such things a regulatory compliance that is not yet touched on here.
  It does occasionally appear to conflate open-source solutions with self-hosted ones which need not necessarily be the case.
  Some companies will let you host proprietary apps on premises.
  It is also possible to pay for third party hosting and administration of open source applications.

(rr-rdm-eln-open-elns)=
## Select Open Infrastructure ELN Options

> These are each quite different but have many of the same core features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following ELN options are each quite different but have many of the same core features.
```

*  [eLabFTW](https://www.elabftw.net/) 
    *   Has features such as: Laboratory resource scheduling feature for booking things like hoods and microscopes, automatic mol file previews for molecules and proteins, and support for free-hand drawing.
    *   eLabFTW has a [website](https://www.elabftw.net/), [documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/) and there is a [demo](https://demo.elabftw.net/login.php) deployment that you can try out.
    *   Self-hosting is *relatively* simple [according to the documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/install.html).
        There is also a [paid support tier](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) which would be recommend for any larger deployment to support the ongoing development of the project.
    *   [Paid cloud hosting](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) is available from the developer in a geographical region suited to your needs.
        A more expensive tier with hosting in France compliant with additional security and privacy certifications is available.

* [openBIS](https://openbis.ch/)

>     *   Robust features for integrated metadata management for example linking to ontologies / controlled vocabularies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Robust features for integrated metadata management, for example, linking to ontologies / controlled vocabularies.
```

    *   openBIS has an API and can integrate with Jupyterhub for Electronic Lab Notebooks.

>     *   Complete laboratory inventory managment system (LIMS) including stores management integrated with protocols and experiment records, including keeping track of bar-coded stocks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Complete Laboratory Inventory Nanagement System (LIMS) including stores management integrated with protocols and experiment records, including keeping track of bar-coded stocks.
```

    *   You can get a feel for it in the [demo](https://openbis-eln-lims.ethz.ch/openbis/webapp/eln-lims/) deployment.
    *   openBIS is a bit more complex to administer [based on its documentation](https://openbis.ch/index.php/docs/admin-documentation/).
    *   As openBIS is developed at ETH Zurich it can be hosted for you under the openRDM service operated by ETH Zurich scientific IT services.
        No fixed pricing is available - cost would be dependent on your specific needs.
    
* [OSF](https://osf.io/)
    *   OSF is oriented towards sharing and collaborating on your work, including the ability to generate DOIs and host pre-prints directly on the main instance.

>     *   It is free to use OSF at the main instance at [osf.io](https://osf.io/) so you can try it out there directly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   It is free to use OSF at the main instance at [osf.io](https://osf.io/).
```

>         For larger data you must provide your own additional [storage addons, available from a number fo cloud storage providers](https://help.osf.io/article/395-storage-add-ons).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        For larger data you must provide your own additional [storage add-ons, available from a number of cloud storage providers](https://help.osf.io/article/395-storage-add-ons).
```

>     *   Whilst you could deploy your own self-hosted OSF this is not how it is intended to be used except for development.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Whilst you could deploy your own self-hosted OSF this is not how it is intended to be used (except for development).
```

    *   The OSF has strong sharing features, making it easy to share parts of your ELN publicly.

> When using an open solution it is always important to consider how you can contribute to its ongoing development and maintenence, for example by donating to the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using an open solution it is always important to consider how you can contribute to its ongoing development and maintenance, for example by donating to the project.
```

ELNs enable researchers to organize and store experimental procedures, protocols, plans, notes, data, and even unfiltered interpretations using their computer or mobile device.
They can be a digital analogue to the paper notebook most researchers keep.
ELNs can offer several advantages over the traditional paper notebook in documenting research during the active phase of a project, including; searchability within and across notebooks, secure storage with multiple redundancies, remote access to notebooks, and the ability to easily share notebooks among team members and collaborators.
ELNs make the practice of {ref}`open notebooks <rr-open-notebooks>` [{term}`def<Open Notebooks>`] practical in a way that it is not for paper lab books.
However, it is important when choosing an ELN solution to avoid giving up the advantages offered by a paper lab notebook.

(rr-rdm-elns-procon)=
## Quick Pros & Cons of ELNs

Electronic Lab Notebooks may provide, among other things, the following **functionalities**:

* A text editor with similar functions as a paper notebook
* A search function

> * Secure storage and back up (with distinct failture modes from paper notebooks)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Secure storage and back up (with distinct failure modes from paper notebooks)
```

* **Learning curve**: ELNs have a longer learning curve than paper notebooks and it takes time to learn how to use them.
User-friendliness and flexibility are important to accommodate the widely varying workflows of each lab member.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing)=
## Choosing an ELN solution

If you are in a position to choose an ELN to use, or are making a choice on behalf of an organisation there are some factors to consider:

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-importance)=
### Importance of getting it right

Many organisations offer software that purports to solve the problem of ELNS.
So choosing a suitable solution can be a major headache and responsibility.
The choice of ELN is an incredibly important decision, and one that your organisation will likely have live with for years, or even decades.
You are putting the record of your research into the hands of the tool that you choose, and entering into a long-term relationship with the provider of your ELN solution.
You are also making a choice about a tool that many of the people in your organisation will interface with closely every day.

> Having to use a tool that is not well fit to it function on a daily basis can be a major problem for productivity and morale.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having to use a tool that is not well fit to its function on a daily basis can be a major problem for productivity and morale.
```

Conversely, a tool that is a good fit gets out of people's way and makes their jobs easier can be a major boost to productivity and morale.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-failure-modes)=
### Failure modes in user adoption of ELNs

Incomplete or inflexible ELN solutions which increase friction in workflows can cause issues.
People will avoid using ill-fitting tools that they perceive them to be getting in their way, especially scientists.
They are creative, stubborn, resourceful, and impatiently focused on anwsering their research questions with watever tools are available to them. 

> Finding software with the flexibility, capability, and scope to keep up is not easy and if it doesn't researchers won't use it - at least not as you indented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finding software with the flexibility, capability, and scope to keep up is not easy and if it doesn't researchers won't use it - at least not as you intended.
```

-   Shadow IT/notebooks
    -   People using their own unsactioned solutions which may be a compliance issue and introduce risks that you have not accounted for.
-   Infrequent updates
    -   People dump a copy of their work into the ELN only as often as necessary for compliance.
-   Consistency issues
    -   If there are paper and potentially multiple electronic copies of some information - what happens when it does not agree? What is the source of truth?
-   Partial adoptions can lead to information which was previous predictably structured in lab notebooks being spread across multiple IT systems and physical copies
-   Practical use and interface issues

>     -   Laptops or tablets can intrduce interface barriers 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    -   Laptops or tablets can introduce interface barriers 
```

This is not necessarily true of ELNs.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-archival)=
### Archival function of notebooks

Few active measures are needed to maintain the data in your paper notebooks. 
The primary vulnerability of paper lab books is that there is only one copy. 
Nevertheless, as long as they are kept in a cool, dry and dark spot (for example a fireproof safe) they will likely last decades.

Electronic data requires much more active upkeep.
Electronic data can *if manged properly* be more resilient to physical threats such as fire and flooding as it can frequently be backed up in multiple locations.
A hard drive, or even a solid state drive, however, cannot be left in a draw for a decade or more and have a high likelihood of working without some amount of bit-rot or compatibility issue when plugged back in.

Lab notebooks perform an archival function and proprietary formats are antithetical to this as they assume the institution which can act as a gatekeeper to the use of the proprietary format will outlive the need to archive the material.
When choosing an archival format one seeks to maximize the likelihood that one can recover the relevant information from that format.

> Using a proprietary solution for archival purposes is talking a needless risk with the future of your data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a proprietary solution for archival purposes is taking a needless risk with the future of your data.
```

Your data's fate can become tied to that of the company, or project, that develops and operates the software that you use to store your lab notes.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-lockin)=
### Lock-in

Most proprietary or open tools will permit you to export your data in one format or another.
The quality of this export is critical to scrutinise.

> The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it is the only option you may loose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it is the only option you may lose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 
```

Mendeley for example began [encrypting their local database](https://www.zotero.org/support/kb/mendeley_import#mendeley_database_encryption). 
This made it impossible to migrate your local library to different reference managers without going through the Mendeley online library feature.
This occurred after they had reached a high degree of market penetration and had been acquired by Elsevier.

When looking for any critical piece of software for long term use the first questions to ask are:
- Is there an Libre / open-source solution to this problem?
- If it is a web app and/or has a server: Could I host my own fully featured instance, should I need to?
- Is there a large/active community using the project, does it have institutional backing of some kind? 
  This might take the form of a company which sells service contracts, or offers paid hosting ideally with feature parity with a self-hosted option. 
  Or perhaps a foundation or other non-profit/academic organisation with robust funding.
- What are the data export options and formats?

> Open solutions provide you with the assurance that if you do the appropriate preparatory work you should be able to access all of your data in it's native form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open solutions provide you with the assurance that if you do the appropriate preparatory work you should be able to access all of your data in its native form.
```

* A search function
* Secure storage and back up (with distinct failure modes from paper notebooks)
* Tools for working with tabular data (calculations and formatting of tables and graphs)
* Templates for documenting standard procedures
* Built-in Laboratory Inventory Management Systems (LIMS) functionality for managing and documenting samples, reagents, and apparatus, or integration with separate dedicated LIMS.
* Collaboration tools for sharing experimental information
* Some ELNs will allow you to comply with standards and regulations because of their certification processes

ELNs also have their **limitations**: 

* **Costs**: Most ELN solutions can only be used through paid plans, or the free plans have reduced functionalities in the number of users, storage space or file sizes.
Your lab may also not have access to tablets or pens that would make the use of ELNs easier.
Check if your institution is offering a solution that you can use without additional costs.
* **File format**: Always check if files can be exported in your preferred file formats to avoid format lock-in.
Some ELNs also have API's that allow integration with other software and workflows. 

> * **Vendor-lock-in**: Once you're using a certain solution you may become dependent on it.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a reference to the lock-in section below?

Author: Addressed in [7322151](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/7322151f466607fe81a458c5ef56e89bc3f16dea)

### Importance of getting it right

Many organisations offer software that purports to solve the problem of ELNS.
So choosing a suitable solution can be a major headache and responsibility.
The choice of ELN is an incredibly important decision, and one that your organisation will likely have live with for years, or even decades.
You are putting the record of your research into the hands of the tool that you choose, and entering into a long-term relationship with the provider of your ELN solution.
You are also making a choice about a tool that many of the people in your organisation will interface with closely every day.
Having to use a tool that is not well fit to its function on a daily basis can be a major problem for productivity and morale.
Conversely, a tool that is a good fit gets out of people's way and makes their jobs easier can be a major boost to productivity and morale.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-failure-modes)=
### Failure modes in user adoption of ELNs

Incomplete or inflexible ELN solutions which increase friction in workflows can cause issues.
People will avoid using ill-fitting tools that they perceive them to be getting in their way, especially scientists.

> They are creative, stubborn, resourceful, and impatiently focused on anwsering their research questions with watever tools are available to them. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They are creative, stubborn, resourceful, and impatiently focused on answering their research questions with whatever tools are available to them. 
```

Finding software with the flexibility, capability, and scope to keep up is not easy and if it doesn't researchers won't use it - at least not as you intended.

-   Shadow IT/notebooks

>     -   People using their own unsactioned solutions which may be a compliance issue and introduce risks that you have not accounted for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    -   People using their own unsanctioned solutions which may be a compliance issue and introduce risks that you have not accounted for
```

    -   If there are paper and potentially multiple electronic copies of some information - what happens when it does not agree? What is the source of truth?
- Sprawl
    -   Partial adoptions can lead to different pieces of information being stored in different systems which might not be connected making it harder to record and find information which was previous in one place.
        This can make information recording and retrieval processes more complex, expensive and brittle 
-   Practical use and interface issues
    -   Laptops or tablets can introduce interface barriers 
        -   Lab gloves may hamper the use of touchscreens and track pads
        -   Free-hand drawing is not always well supported which can be necessary when using notation that is not easily represented in simple text such as mathematical and chemical notation
        -   Client issues, such as native mobile applications with incomplete featuresets, slow web-apps that may require an always-on connection and not be able to cache local changes
        -   No spatial memory, whereas in a physical book people may remember where they wrote things and can open it roughly on the right page

>         -   Extra expense, maintenence & procurement issues with hardware suitable for use in your research environment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        -   Extra expense, maintenance and procurement issues with hardware suitable for use in your research environment
```

-   Lack of sufficiently available training on more complex aspects of the ELN solution leading to poor, mis-use, or under-use of ELN features

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-compare-to-paper)=
### Always compare to paper notebooks

When picking an ELN remember to always compare the ELN to a paper notebook and not just to other ELNs.

> It is likely paper that you are replacing so this is the benchmark against which to compare.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
I think this is clear from the first sentence.

> Consider the differences between a paper copy of a lab notebook and an electronic copy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
I think this is clear from the first sentence and the sentence after this one.

Author: I appreciate that these points may seem redundant but they are all making a slightly different points.

- when you've got your matrix of ELN solutions don't forget to have paper in there too
- why have paper in there: because that's the thing you are replacing so it's the most relevant point of comparison
- don't forget to add the properties of paper notebooks that might be missing from the all the ELN feature lists you've encountered to your comparison matrix
- If one of those features of paper is a deal breaker and is not present in any of the ELNs then you may need to consider other options or delay ELN adoption until you can find one that does have this feature of paper

> Consider also which properties of a paper copy is it important to you that you are able to retain when adopting an electronic alternative.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider which properties of a paper copy are important to you and which should be retained when adopting an electronic alternative.
```

If your provider of paper lab books goes out of business it has almost no bearing on your ability to continue doing your work.
One paper notebook is much like another, finding a new provider is pretty easy.
Changing providers does not impact on your ability to access your past notebooks or to continue operating with the same workflow in future ones.
This is not necessarily true of ELNs.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-archival)=
### Archival function of notebooks

Few active measures are needed to maintain the data in your paper notebooks. 
The primary vulnerability of paper lab books is that there is only one copy. 
Nevertheless, as long as they are kept in a cool, dry and dark spot (for example a fireproof safe) they will likely last decades.

Electronic data requires much more active upkeep.
Electronic data can, *if managed properly*, be more resilient to physical threats such as fire and flooding as it can frequently be backed up in multiple locations.
A hard drive, or even a solid state drive, however, cannot be left in a draw for a decade or more and have a high likelihood of working without some amount of bit-rot or compatibility issues when plugged back in.

> Lab notebooks perform an archival function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For digital data it is important for archiving and maintaining the data to use formats that maximize the likelihood of recovering relevant information.
```
This paragraph starts as something which should probably be the first paragraph of this section, but then only talks about digital/proprietary formats, so I would lean into that second bit and rewrite the first lines.

Author: Addressed in [a63fdec](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/a63fdec94d17943207bf2f62169d45151de10099)

When choosing an archival format one seeks to maximize the likelihood that one can recover the relevant information from that format.
Proprietary formats are antithetical to this.
Proprietary solutions generally obfuscate the format, even if just through absense of generally available specifications and documentation.
Proprietary formats generally have a single implementation from their creator, this creates a single point of failure.
Open formats can have multiple different implementations of tools which read them.
If there is a good enough specification then new tools can even be written for the format if none of the originals are available anymore.

> Proprietary tools way require some kind of license activation process to use this may not be possible if their vendor no longer exists.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Proprietary tools may require some kind of license activation process to use this may not be possible if their vendor no longer exists.
```

Using a proprietary solution for archival purposes is therefore taking a needless risk with the future of your data.

> Your data's fate is tied to the format in which it is stored choose it wisely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your data's fate is tied to the format in which it is stored so choose it wisely.
```

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-lockin)=
### Lock-in

Most proprietary or open tools will permit you to export your data in one format or another.
The quality of this export is critical to scrutinise.
The ability to save all your lab books as PDFs is fine but if it is the only option you may lose a lot of metadata, and the ability to import your data into a new solution. 

> The ability to export your data and retain the original structure is very important to evaluate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ability to export your data and retain the original structure is very important.
```

Author: This is sometimes a matter of degree, you may be able to retain most of the information and the losses are acceptable to you when performing a migration. So the degree to which it is possible to 'losslessly' export your data is the criterion that I'm suggesting people consider when evaluating an ELN.

This made it impossible to migrate your local library to different reference managers without going through the Mendeley online library feature.
This occurred after they had reached a high degree of market penetration and had been acquired by Elsevier.

When looking for any critical piece of software for long term use the first questions to ask are:
- Is there an Libre / open-source solution to this problem?
- If it is a web app and/or has a server: Could I host my own fully featured instance, should I need to?
- Is there a large/active community using the project, does it have institutional backing of some kind? 
  This might take the form of a company which sells service contracts, or offers paid hosting ideally with feature parity with a self-hosted option. 
  Or perhaps a foundation or other non-profit/academic organisation with robust funding.
- What are the data export options and formats?

Open solutions provide you with the assurance that if you do the appropriate preparatory work you should be able to access all of your data in its native form.

> For example keeping copies of the ELN software that can be run offline in a VM or similar computational environment in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example keeping copies of the ELN software that can be run offline in a virtual machine (VM) or similar computational environment in the future.
```
Or add it to the glossary as a definition? The abbreviation hasn't been used before so should be explained in some way

The data will also likely be stored in an open format from which it can relatively easily be extracted and ported to a new format.
This may still be a lot of work but it is much more attainable than reverse engineering a proprietary format for which there is no documentation, or worse - dealing with encrypted files.

You can pay for third party hosting and administration of open source applications.
This is a solution when you don't have the expertise or internal resources to administer a self-hosted instance of an open-source ELN solution. 
In this case you get the best of both worlds: the benefits of professional support and the reassurance of an open solution.
You should still take regular local backups of exports from your hosting provider from which you could restore your ELN system with different hosting.
This means that you retain the option to change providers.
Conventional Software as a Service (SaaS) platforms are highly vertically integrated: the software development, hosting, administration, and support are package deal that you must take or leave as is.

> When using open tools each of these layers can seperated, though they do not need to be.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using open tools each of these layers can separated, though they do not need to be.
```

> This gives you the flexibility to change your provider of any of them indepentenly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This gives you the flexibility to change your provider of any of them independently.
```

This improves your bargaining position, but may increase procurement complexity.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-automation)=
### Automation and integration

ELNs with APIs have the potential for integration with instruments that would permit direct deposition of data from connected instruments into ELNs or other connected research data management infrastructure.
These sorts of integrations are especially useful in workflows at core facilities. 
For example, bioimaging facilities can automate a substantial part of the image metadata deposition into image data management tools such as [OMERO](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/omero/).

(rr-rdm-elns-standards)=

> ## ELN standards and Project governance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## ELN standards and project governance
```

Nevertheless, ELNs come with a considerable amount of additional complexity and additional risks - so it is important to have a mitigation plan.
The ELN space is still quite young and rapidly changing.
As such it is important to think about how the academic community wants the ELN infrastructure to be owned and governed in the long run.
An interesting model to consider emulating here is [moodle](https://moodle.com/), an open source electronic learning environment popular with universities.
It offers commercial support and hosting and has a network of developers across the education sector who contribute to the core project, as well as creating custom integrations and extensions to meet their particular needs.
This structure allows institutions to pool resources to fund the development of features that they all need and keeps this infrastructural code in common ownership, avoiding the worst lock-in issues arising from the use of proprietary solutions.
This more open distributed model also allows individuals to work on their own custom extensions and integrations instead of being reliant on the ability and willingness of a company to implement a feature that you need.

> In the absense of an open standard for representing electronic lab notebook content using an open ELN solution is still no guarantee of data portability and interoperatbility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the absence of an open standard for representing electronic lab notebook content using an open ELN solution is still no guarantee of data portability and interoperability.
```

I'm not sure what this sentence means: Even if there is a standard it doesn't mean that data is portable/interoperable? Or even if there is no standard this could still be the case?

Author: Addressed in [f64204a](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3466/commits/f64204a51b90b4aad4ed831dfd8af15a5d56f531)

> Such a standard would, if properly adhered too, could reduce the lock-in risk associated with using using both open and proprietary tools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such a standard would, if properly adhered too, reduce the lock-in risk associated with using both open and proprietary tools.
```

    *   eLabFTW has a [website](https://www.elabftw.net/), [documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/) and there is a [demo](https://demo.elabftw.net/login.php) deployment that you can try out.
    *   Self-hosting is *relatively* simple [according to the documentation](https://doc.elabftw.net/install.html).
        There is also a [paid support tier](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) which would be recommend for any larger deployment to support the ongoing development of the project.
    *   [Paid cloud hosting](https://www.deltablot.com/elabftw/) is available from the developer in a geographical region suited to your needs.
        A more expensive tier with hosting in France compliant with additional security and privacy certifications is available.

* [openBIS](https://openbis.ch/)
    *   Robust features for integrated metadata management, for example, linking to ontologies / controlled vocabularies.
    *   openBIS has an API and can integrate with Jupyterhub for Electronic Lab Notebooks.

>     *   Complete Laboratory Inventory Nanagement System (LIMS) including stores management integrated with protocols and experiment records, including keeping track of bar-coded stocks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   Complete LIMS where storage is integrated with protocols and experiment records, including keeping track of bar-coded stocks.
```

    *   You can get a feel for it in the [demo](https://openbis-eln-lims.ethz.ch/openbis/webapp/eln-lims/) deployment.
    *   openBIS is a bit more complex to administer [based on its documentation](https://openbis.ch/index.php/docs/admin-documentation/).
    *   As openBIS is developed at ETH Zurich it can be hosted for you under the openRDM service operated by ETH Zurich scientific IT services.
        No fixed pricing is available - cost would be dependent on your specific needs.
    
* [OSF](https://osf.io/)

>     *   OSF is oriented towards sharing and collaborating on your work, including the ability to generate DOIs and host pre-prints directly on the main instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    *   OSF is oriented towards sharing and collaborating on your work, including the ability to generate DOIs and host pre-prints directly on the main instance.
    See {ref}`OSF<rr-rdm-repository-osf>` for more information.
```

    *   It is free to use OSF at the main instance at [osf.io](https://osf.io/).
        For larger data you must provide your own additional [storage add-ons, available from a number of cloud storage providers](https://help.osf.io/article/395-storage-add-ons).
    *   Whilst you could deploy your own self-hosted OSF this is not how it is intended to be used (except for development).
    *   The OSF has strong sharing features, making it easy to share parts of your ELN publicly.

When using an open solution it is always important to consider how you can contribute to its ongoing development and maintenance, for example by donating to the project.
If it makes sense given the makeup of your organisation and that of the project you may also be able to contribute developer time to the project.

> (rr-rdm-using-non-elns-for-eln-things)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(rr-rdm-using-non-elns-for-eln-things)=
```

## Using non-ELNs for ELN things

> Note taking and personal knowledge management (PKM) applications of various kinds have been pushed into service as ELNs by many individuals and institutions, despite not being designed specifically for this tasks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note taking and personal knowledge management (PKM) applications of various kinds have been pushed into service as ELNs by many individuals and institutions, despite not being designed specifically for this task.
```

Some tools are better suited to be used 'off-label' as ELNs than others.
Some may have significant drawbacks compared to purpose built solutions, despite being better at some things than currently available dedicated ELN options.

> Microsoft OneNote is quite popular as an ELN despite a proprietary notebook format with limited export options and that [microsoft has entertained getting rid of the good (desktop) version this of application in favour of its much less featureful 'web' version in the past. Though they have apparently relented, for now.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4IkUfh05TGE).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Microsoft OneNote is quite popular as an ELN despite a proprietary notebook format with limited export options and that [Microsoft has entertained getting rid of the good (desktop) version this of application in favour of its much less featureful 'web' version in the past. Though they have apparently relented, for now](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4IkUfh05TGE).
```

> OneNote is a good experience as a free-form note taking tool especially for hand-written or drawn notes and automatic linking of anotations to audio timestamps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OneNote is a good experience as a free-form note taking tool especially for hand-written or drawn notes and automatic linking of annotations to audio timestamps.
```

The lack of a good version history is a distinct downside.

> Its popularity likely stems, in part, from its availability in the Microsoft office suite.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Its popularity likely stems, in part, from its availability in the Microsoft Office suite (software already provided by institutions which do not incur additional costs).
```

> Software which most institutions will already have, meaning they will not incurr additional costs if they use OneNote.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I would combine these two sentences, otherwise it is not very clear what you mean by the current one.

Other generic note taking applications have featuresets which are not dissimilar to ELN solutions.

> For example open source applications like [logseq](https://logseq.com/) or [zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/), and proprietary ones like: [obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) or [notion](https://www.notion.so/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, open source applications like [logseq](https://logseq.com/) or [zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/), and proprietary ones like: [obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) or [notion](https://www.notion.so/).
```

Always have an exit strategy in case the solution is no longer offered or if you're moving institutions and you no longer have access.
* **Sustainability**: Choose a solution that has a larger chance of being around for a long time.
* **Drawing**: Not all solutions have the tools or capabilities to include drawings or integration with drawing software.
* **Security**: Before using an ELN solution you should check any backup plans and data security measures, especially if you're working with sensitive data.
* **Laboratory situation**: Your lab may not have an internet connection or electronic tools could affect samples, reagents or magnets in the lab. 
* **Learning curve**: ELNs have a longer learning curve than paper notebooks and it takes time to learn how to use them.
User-friendliness and flexibility are important to accommodate the widely varying workflows of each lab member.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing)=
## Choosing an ELN solution

If you are in a position to choose an ELN to use, or are making a choice on behalf of an organisation there are some factors to consider:

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-importance)=
### Importance of getting it right

> Many organisations offer software that purports to solve the problem of ELNS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many organisations offer software that purports to solve the problem of ELNs.
```

So choosing a suitable solution can be a major headache and responsibility.
The choice of ELN is an incredibly important decision, and one that your organisation will likely have to live with for years, or even decades.
You are putting the record of your research into the hands of the tool that you choose, and entering into a long-term relationship with the provider of your ELN solution.
You are also making a choice about a tool that many of the people in your organisation will interface with closely every day.
Having to use a tool that is not well fit to its function on a daily basis can be a major problem for productivity and morale.
Conversely, a tool that is a good fit gets out of people's way and makes their jobs easier can be a major boost to productivity and morale.

(rr-rdm-elns-choosing-failure-modes)=
### Failure modes in user adoption of ELNs

Incomplete or inflexible ELN solutions which increase friction in workflows can cause issues.

> People will avoid using ill-fitting tools that they perceive them to be getting in their way, especially scientists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
People will avoid using ill-fitting tools that they perceive to be getting in their way, especially scientists.
```

They are creative, stubborn, resourceful, and impatiently focused on answering their research questions with whatever tools are available to them. 
Finding software with the flexibility, capability, and scope to keep up is not easy and if it doesn't researchers won't use it - at least not as you intended.

-   Shadow IT/notebooks
    -   People using their own unsanctioned solutions which may be a compliance issue and introduce risks that you have not accounted for
-   Infrequent updates
    -   People dump a copy of their work into the ELN only as often as necessary for compliance
-   Consistency issues
    -   If there are paper and potentially multiple electronic copies of some information - what happens when it does not agree? What is the source of truth?
- Sprawl

>     -   Partial adoptions can lead to different pieces of information being stored in different systems which might not be connected making it harder to record and find information which was previous in one place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    -   Partial adoptions can lead to different pieces of information being stored in different systems which might not be connected making it harder to record and find information which was previously in one place.
```
